**Features of Java**
====================

There is given many features of java. They are also known as java buzzwords.

1.  Simple

2.  Object-Oriented

3.  Platform independent

4.  Secured

5.  Robust

6.  Architecture neutral

7.  Portable

8.  Dynamic

9.  Interpreted

10. High Performance

11. Multithreaded

12. Distributed

 

**Simple**
----------

According to Sun, Java language is simple because:

-   syntax is based on C++ (so easier for programmers to learn it after C++).

-   removed many confusing and/or rarely-used features e.g., explicit pointers,
    operator overloading etc.

-   No need to remove unreferenced objects because there is Automatic Garbage
    Collection in java.

 

**Object-oriented**
-------------------

Object-oriented means we organize our software as a combination of different
types of objects that incorporates both data and behaviour.

Object-oriented programming(OOPs) is a methodology that simplify software
development and maintenance by providing some rules.

Basic concepts of OOPs are:

1.  Object

2.  Class

3.  Inheritance

4.  Polymorphism

5.  Abstraction

6.  Encapsulation

 

**Platform Independent**
------------------------

A platform is the hardware or software environment in which a program runs.
There are two types of platforms software-based and hardware-based. Java
provides software-based platform. The Java platform differs from most other
platforms in the sense that it's a software-based platform that runs on top of
other hardware-based platforms. It has two components:

1.  Runtime Environment

2.  API(Application Programming Interface)

Java code can be run on multiple platforms e.g.Windows,Linux,Sun Solaris,Mac/OS
etc. Java code is compiled by the compiler and converted into bytecode.This
bytecode is a platform independent code because it can be run on multiple
platforms i.e. Write Once and Run Anywhere(WORA).

 

**Secured**
-----------

-   Java is secured because:

-   No explicit pointer

-   Programs run inside virtual machine sandbox.

-   **Classloader-** adds security by separating the package for the classes of
    the local file system from those that are imported from network sources.

-   **Bytecode Verifier-** checks the code fragments for illegal code that can
    violate access right to objects.

-   **Security Manager-** determines what resources a class can access such as
    reading and writing to the local disk.

These security are provided by java language. Some security can also be provided
by application developer through SSL,JAAS,cryptography etc.

 

**Robust**
----------

Robust simply means strong. Java uses strong memory management. There are lack
of pointers that avoids security problem. There is automatic garbage collection
in java. There is exception handling and type checking mechanism in java. All
these points makes java robust.

 

**Architecture-neutral**
------------------------

There is no implementation dependent features e.g. size of primitive types is
set.

 

**Portable**
------------

We may carry the java bytecode to any platform.

**High-performance**
--------------------

Java is faster than traditional interpretation since byte code is "close" to
native code still somewhat slower than a compiled language (e.g., C++)

**Distributed**
---------------

We can create distributed applications in java. RMI and EJB are used for
creating distributed applications. We may access files by calling the methods
from any machine on the internet.

**Multi-threaded**
------------------

A thread is like a separate program, executing concurrently. We can write Java
programs that deal with many tasks at once by defining multiple threads. The
main advantage of multi-threading is that it shares the same memory. Threads are
important for multi-media, Web applications etc.
